designNotes.md, before:

Since the project is sort of sprawling and might be a little confusing, particularly coming from an excel based math model, I thought I would provide some reasoning behind some of the design decisions.

The rocket model system makes fairly consistent use of object oriented design throughout. By separating each main component of the simulation into its own class, files can be made smaller and it is easier to figure out where things belong. The rocket is in a section all by itself, where it basically performs all of the necessary aerodynamics calculations. Because there are way more factors affecting aerodynamics than anything else, it takes up way more space than anything else. The parachute and motor classes are separate, but it simplifies where data is stored a little bit. Object-oriented structure also lends itself to a component based rocket simulation. You can change which motor you want to use, but keep the same rocket frame. In case I ever want to rewrite the aerodynamics stuff, I kept the simulation and logging apart from the rocket itself.

Unfortunately, every decision has its downsides, and a class-based system generates lots of different files and sometimes wastes time. For example, it is difficult to efficiently fit a model for drag, then copy that model over to the models section, then copy a call to that model over to the environment. However, I couldn't really figure out a better way to do it.

Helpers is supposed to have general 'helper' functions, which aren't specific to rockets or to aerodynamics, but accept arguments and return a solution. The functions should have descriptive names so that you don't have to go into the folder to figure out what they do.

There are some folders that I mostly just kept so that all of the stuff would be in one place. Tests is just to make sure some of the tricky calculations are working correctly, but it isn't really finished. Visualization is to help figure out what is wrong with the rocket, but also to make sure that things are working correctly.

Commit message:

Added 3D position with two axes of rotation

designNotes.md, after:

Potential Issues:
- Translational drag isn't opposed to rotation correctly
- The calculation for angular drag is wrong
- Something, somewhere is seeking the vertical axis instead of the direction of motion
    - The gravity-pressure thing is flipped somewhere
    - If it only has a z-axis drag effect, it will seek the center



# Design Notes

Since the project is sort of sprawling and might be a little confusing, particularly coming from an excel based math model, I thought I would provide some reasoning behind some of the design decisions.

The rocket model system makes fairly consistent use of object oriented design throughout. By separating each main component of the simulation into its own class, files can be made smaller and it is easier to figure out where things belong. The rocket is in a section all by itself, where it basically performs all of the necessary aerodynamics calculations. Because there are way more factors affecting aerodynamics than anything else, it takes up way more space than anything else. The parachute and motor classes are separate, but it simplifies where data is stored a little bit. Object-oriented structure also lends itself to a component based rocket simulation. You can change which motor you want to use, but keep the same rocket frame. In case I ever want to rewrite the aerodynamics stuff, I kept the simulation and logging apart from the rocket itself.

Unfortunately, every decision has its downsides, and a class-based system generates lots of different files and sometimes wastes time. For example, it is difficult to efficiently fit a model for drag, then copy that model over to the models section, then copy a call to that model over to the environment. However, I couldn't really figure out a better way to do it.

Helpers is supposed to have general 'helper' functions, which aren't specific to rockets or to aerodynamics, but accept arguments and return a solution. The functions should have descriptive names so that you don't have to go into the folder to figure out what they do.

There are some folders that I mostly just kept so that all of the stuff would be in one place. Tests is just to make sure some of the tricky calculations are working correctly, but it isn't really finished. Visualization is to help figure out what is wrong with the rocket, but also to make sure that things are working correctly.
